Listing common threat examples (#1276)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: docs/basics/common-goals.en.md

---
title: "Common Goals"
icon: 'material/eye-outline'
---

> Broadly speaking, we categorize our recommendations into these general categories of [threats](threat-modeling.md) or goals that apply to most people. ==You may be concerned with none, one, a few, or all of these possibilities==, and the tools and services you use depend on what your goals are. You may have specific threats outside of these categories as well, which is perfectly fine! The important part is developing an understanding of the benefits and shortcomings of the tools you choose to use, because virtually none of them will protect you from every threat imaginable.

Reviewer: Need some sort of header so that whole top section is available in the TOC

```suggestion
## Our General Categories

Broadly speaking, we categorize our recommendations into these general categories of [threats](threat-modeling.md) or goals that apply to most people. ==You may be concerned with none, one, a few, or all of these possibilities==, and the tools and services you use depend on what your goals are. You may have specific threats outside of these categories as well, which is perfectly fine! The important part is developing an understanding of the benefits and shortcomings of the tools you choose to use, because virtually none of them will protect you from every threat imaginable.
```

Author: I don't think so, we don't do this on the linux page, the metadata page, and many other pages. Wikipedia does not include the introductory section in its table of contents. h1 followed immediately by h2 doesn't really make sense as a layout, or logically: Every sub-header currently is a sub-thought of the top content, whereas this change would make them logical equals in weight.

- <span class="pg-purple">:material-incognito: Anonymity</span> - Shielding your online activity from your real-life identity, protecting you from people who are trying to uncover *your* identity specifically
- <span class="pg-red">:material-target-account: Targeted Attacks</span> - Being protected  from dedicated hackers or other malicious agents trying to gain access to *your* data or devices specifically
- <span class="pg-orange">:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks</span> - Being protected from things like malware, data breaches, and other attacks that are made against many people at once
- <span class="pg-teal">:material-server-network: Service Providers</span> - Protecting your data from service providers, e.g. with end-to-end encryption rendering your data unreadable to the server
- <span class="pg-blue">:material-eye-outline: Mass Surveillance</span> - Protection from government agencies, organizations, websites, and services working together to track your activities

> - <span class="pg-brown">:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism</span> - Protecting yourself from big advertising networks like Google and Facebook, as well as a myriad of other third-party trackers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <span class="pg-brown">:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism</span> - Protecting yourself from vast advertising networks, as well as a myriad of other undesired third-parties
```

Author: > Using examples to back up statements of fact can [add value to your writing](https://www.constant-content.com/content-writing-service/2017/12/freelance-writing-tips/). Making a statement without using examples can make your writing muddy, as well as create more work for the reader. Examples make statements clearer, give readers more information, and decrease the chances that the fact or idea to be wrongly applied to real-life situations.

([source](https://www.constant-content.com/content-writing-service/2007/12/the-importance-of-using-examples/))

I would rather not leave it up to reader interpretation what "advertising networks" means.

Reviewer: It is described later on the page

Author: I changed "third-party trackers" to "third-party data collectors" which I feel is more all-encompassing, but I don't think removing examples of the threat is helpful here since this category is less self-explanatory than the others.

Anonymity is often confused for privacy, but it's a distinct concept. While privacy is a set of choices you make about how your data is used and shared, anonymity is the complete disassociation of your online activities from your real-life identity.

Whistleblowers and journalists, for example, can have a much more extreme threat model requiring total anonymity. That's not only hiding what they do, what data they have, and not getting hacked by hackers or governments, but also hiding who they are entirely. They will sacrifice any kind of convenience if it means protecting their anonymity, privacy, or security, as their lives could depend on it. Most regular people do not need to go so far.

## Privacy From Service Providers

<span class="pg-teal">:material-server-network: Service Providers</span>

We live in a world where almost everything is connected to the internet. Our "private" messages, emails, social interactions are typically stored on a server somewhere. Generally, when you send someone a message, that message is then stored on a server, and when your friend wants to read the message, the server will show it to them.

> The obvious problem with this is that the service provider (or a hacker who has compromised the server) can look into your "private" conversations whenever and however they want to do it, without you ever knowing. This applies to many common services like Discord, Telegram, SMS messages, and so on.

Reviewer: In order of most prevalent to least

```suggestion
The obvious problem with this is that the service provider (or a hacker who has compromised the server) can look into your "private" conversations whenever and however they want to do it, without you ever knowing. This applies to many common services like SMS messaging, Telegram, Discord, and so on.
```

Thankfully, end-to-end encryption can alleviate this issue by encrypting communications between parties before they are even sent to the server. The confidentiality of their messages are guaranteed, so long as the service provider does not have access to the user's private key.

??? note "Note on web-based encryption"

    In practice, the effectiveness of different end-to-end encryption implementations varies. Applications such as [Signal](../real-time-communication.md#signal) run natively on the user's system, and every copy of of the application is the same across different installations. If the service provider was to backdoor their applications to try and steal your private keys, that could be detected later using reverse engineering. 
    

>     On the other hand, web based end-to-end encryption implementations such as ProtonMail's webmail or Bitwarden's web vault rely on the server dynamically serving Javascript code to the browser to handle cryptographic operations. A malicious server could target a specific user and send them malicious Javascript code to steal their encryption key, and it would be extremely hard for the user to ever notice such a thing. Even if the user does notice the attempt to steal their key, it would be incredibly hard to prove that it is the provider trying to do so, because the server can choose to serve different web clients to different users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    On the other hand, web based end-to-end encryption implementations such as ProtonMail's webmail or Bitwarden's web vault rely on the server dynamically serving JavaScript code to the browser to handle cryptographic operations. A malicious server could target a specific user and send them malicious Javascript code to steal their encryption key, and it would be extremely hard for the user to ever notice such a thing. Even if the user does notice the attempt to steal their key, it would be incredibly hard to prove that it is the provider trying to do so, because the server can choose to serve different web clients to different users. 
```

>     Therefore, whenever possible you should choose to use native applications which implement end-to-end encryption rather than web clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Therefore, when relying on end-to-end encryption, you should choose to use native applications whenever possible.
```

Even with end-to-end encryption, service providers can still profile you based on **metadata**, which is not typically protected. While the service provider could not read your messages to see what you're saying, they can still observe things like who you're talking to, how often you message them, and what times you're typically active. Protection of metadata is fairly uncommon, and you should pay close attention to the technical documentation of the software you are using to see if there is any metadata reduction or protection at all, if that is a concern for you.

## Security and Privacy

<span class="pg-orange">:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks</span>

> Security and privacy are often conflated, because you need security to obtain any semblance of privacy—Using tools which appear private is futile if they could easily be exploited by attackers to release your data later. However the inverse is not necessarily true, the most secure service in the world *isn't necessarily* private. The best example of this is trusting data to Google, who have never lost data to breaches and employ industry-leading security experts to secure their services. Even though Google provides a very secure service, very few would consider their data private in their hands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Security and privacy are often conflated, because you need security to obtain any semblance of privacy; using tools which appear private is futile if they could easily be exploited by attackers to release your data later. However, the inverse is not necessarily true—the most secure service in the world *isn't necessarily* private. The best example of this is trusting data to Google, who have never lost data to breaches and employ industry-leading security experts to secure their services. Even though Google provides a very secure service, very few would consider their data private in their hands.
```

When it comes to application security, we generally do not (and sometimes cannot) know if the software that we use is malicious, or might one day become malicious. Even with the most trustworthy developers, there is generally no guarantee that their software does not have a serious vulnerability that could later be exploited.

To minimize the potential damage that a malicious piece of software can do, you should employ security by compartmentalization. This could come in the form of using different computers for different jobs, using virtual machines groups of related applications, or using a secure operating system with an strong focus on application sandboxing and mandatory access control.

!!! tip

    Mobile operating systems are generally safer than desktop operating systems when it comes to application sandboxing. Apps cannot obtain root access and only have access to system resources which you grant them.

>     Desktop operating systems generally lag behind on proper sandboxing. ChromeOS has similar sandboxing properties to Android, and macOS has opt-in (for developers) sandboxing and strong permissions, however these operating systems do transmit identifying information to their respective OEMs. Linux tends to not submit information to system vendors, but it has poor protection against exploits and malicious apps. This can be mitigated somewhat with specialized distributions which make heavy use of VMs or containers, such as QubesOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Desktop operating systems generally lag behind on proper sandboxing. Chrome OS has similar sandboxing properties to Android, and macOS has opt-in (for developers) sandboxing and strong permissions, however these operating systems do transmit identifying information to their respective OEMs. Linux tends to not submit information to system vendors, but it has poor protection against exploits and malicious apps. This can be mitigated somewhat with specialized distributions which make heavy use of VMs or containers, such as Qubes OS.
```

<span class="pg-red">:material-target-account: Targeted Attacks</span>

Targeted attacks against a specific user are more problematic to deal with. Common avenues of attack include sending malicious documents via emails, exploiting vulnerabilities in the browser and operating systems, and physical attacks. If this is a concern for you, you may have to employ more advanced threat mitigation strategies.

!!! tip

>     **Web browsers**, **email clients**, and **office applications** all typically run untrusted code sent to you from third-parties by design. Running multiple virtual machines separating applications like these from your main system and each other is one technique you can use to avoid an exploit in these applications from gaining access to the rest of your system. Technologies like QubesOS or Microsoft Defender Application Guard on Windows provide convenient methods to seamlessly do this, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Web browsers**, **email clients**, and **office applications** all typically run untrusted code sent to you from third-parties by design. Running multiple virtual machines separating applications like these from your main system and each other is one technique you can use to avoid an exploit in these applications from gaining access to the rest of your system. Technologies like Qubes OS or Microsoft Defender Application Guard on Windows provide convenient methods to seamlessly do this, for example.
```

If you are concerned about **physical attacks** you should use an operating system with a secure verified boot implementation, such as Android, iOS, or macOS. You should also make sure that your drive is encrypted, and that the operating system uses a TPM or Secure Element for rate limiting attempts to enter the encryption passphrase. You should avoid sharing your computer with people you don't trust, because most desktop operating systems do not encrypt data separately per-user.

## Mass Surveillance Programs

> Mass surveillance is the surveillance of many or all of a population to monitor that group of citizens. It often refers to government programs such as the ones [disclosed by Edward Snowden in 2013](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance_disclosures_(2013%E2%80%93present)), however it can also be carried out by corporations, either on behalf of government agencies or by their own initiative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mass surveillance are efforts to surveil many or all of a given population. It often refers to government programs such as the ones [disclosed by Edward Snowden in 2013](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance_disclosures_(2013%E2%80%93present)), however it can also be carried out by corporations, either on behalf of government agencies or by their own initiative.
```

Online, you can be tracked via a wide variety of methods, including but not limited to:

- Your IP address
- Browser cookies
- Data you submit to websites

> - Your browser fingerprint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your browser and device fingerprints
```

Despite growing mass surveillance in the United States, the government has found that mass surveillance programs like Section 215 have had "little unique value" with respect to stopping actual crimes or terrorist plots, with efforts largely duplicating the FBI's own targeted surveillance programs.[^1]

<span class="pg-brown">:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism</span>

> Surveillance capitalism is an economic system centered around the capture and commodification of personal data for the core purpose of profit-making.[^2]

> Tracking and surveillance by private corporations is a growing concern for many as well. Massive ad networks operated by Google and Facebook span the internet far beyond just the sites they control, tracking your actions along the way. Using tools like adblockers to block network requests to their servers, and reading privacy policies of the services you use to ensure your data isn't being used or shared for marketing purposes are some effective things you can do to avoid the misuse of your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracking and surveillance by private corporations is a growing concern for many as well. Household names like Google and Facebook, as well as undistinguished foes, contribute to massive ad networks which span the internet far beyond just the sites they control, recording and monetizing your actions along the way. Using tools like content blockers to limit network requests to their servers and block third-party content can help, as can reading privacy policies of the services you use to get a feel for how your data may be handled, but they do not offer any guarantees so it is important to take more surefire steps as well.
```

Author: I'm not sure this change actually adds clarity here, plus most of what you are adding is covered in the following paragraph.

Additionally, even companies outside of the ad-tech/tracking space can share your information with [data brokers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_broker) (like Cambridge Analytica, Experian, or Datalogix) or other parties, so you can't automatically assume your data is safe merely because the service you are using doesn't fall within a typical data sharing/tracking category. The strongest protection against corporate data collection is to always encrypt or obfuscate your data whenever possible to make it as difficult as possible for different providers to correlate data with each other and build a profile on you.

## Limiting Public Information

<span class="pg-green">:material-account-search: Public Exposure</span>

The best way to ensure your data is private is to simply not put it out there in the first place. Deleting information you can find about yourself online is one of the best first steps you can take to regain your privacy.

- [View our guide on account deletion :material-arrow-right:](account-deletion.md)

> On sites where you do share information, checking the privacy settings of your account to limit how widely that data is spread is very important. For example, if your accounts have a "private mode", enable it to make sure your account isn't being indexed by search engines and can't be viewed by people you don't vet beforehand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On sites where you do share information, checking the privacy settings of your account to limit how widely that data is spread is very important. For example, if your accounts have a "private mode," enable it to make sure your account isn't being indexed by search engines and can't be viewed by individuals you don't vet beforehand.
```

Author: Clearly you are not a programmer /s

We use "people" extensively throughout this page though, what makes this instance different?

Reviewer: Idk in my head I was thinking people could indirectly imply people at the company, whereas individuals leaves no uncertainty since an individual isn't a company.

Censorship on corporate platforms is increasingly common as platforms like Twitter and Facebook give in to public demand, market pressures, and pressures from government agencies. Government pressures can be covert requests to businesses, such as the White House [requesting the takedown](https://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/17/technology/on-the-web-a-fine-line-on-free-speech-across-globe.html) of a provocative YouTube video; or overt, such as the Chinese government requiring companies to adhere to a strict regime of censorship.

People concerned with the threat of censorship can use technologies like Tor to circumvent it, and support platforms which provide censorship-resistant communication such as Matrix, which has no centralized account authority which can close down accounts arbitrarily.

!!! important

    While simply evading censorship in itself is relatively easy, hiding the fact that you are evading the censorship system from the censors can be very problematic.

>     You should consider what aspects of the network your adversary can observe, and whether you have plausible deniability for your actions. Take encrypted DNS for example, while it can help bypass rudimentary censorship systems based solely on DNS, it cannot truly hide what you are visiting from your ISP. A VPN or Tor can help hide what you are visiting from the network administrators, but cannot hide that you are using those networks. Pluggable transports like Obfs4proxy, Meek or Shadowsocks can help you evade firewalls that block common VPN protocols or Tor, but an adversary can still figure out that you are actively trying to bypass their censorship system as opposed to just protecting your privacy through probing or deep packet inspection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You should consider what aspects of the network your adversary can observe, and whether you have plausible deniability for your actions. Take encrypted DNS for example—while it can help bypass rudimentary censorship systems based solely on DNS, it cannot truly hide what you are visiting from your ISP. A VPN or Tor can help hide what you are visiting from the network administrators, but cannot hide that you are using those networks. Pluggable transports like Obfs4proxy, Meek or Shadowsocks can help you evade firewalls that block common VPN protocols or Tor, but an adversary can still figure out that you are actively trying to bypass their censorship system as opposed to just protecting your privacy through probing or deep packet inspection.
```

Author: Interesting how you removed a — earlier and added one here, lol. The rest of the site seems to disagree with this change:

<img width="370" alt="Screenshot 2022-05-21 at 15 52 39@2x" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3637842/169668586-caf6f591-e61c-4bac-80bc-885560c19f63.png">

Reviewer: "For example" is used differently here.

"Take encrypted DNS for example" is pretty much a complete sentence - it's telling the reader to take something as an example. Just like telling someone to take a cracker to eat or something lol. Whereas just "for example" is serving sort of as a transition

Author: I don't think so at all... It's what the rest of that sentence ("...while **it** can help bypass rudimentary censorship systems based solely on DNS, **it** cannot truly hide what you are visiting from your ISP") is referencing. Neither part of that sentence can exist without the other.

If you want, we could change it to:

> For example, using encrypted DNS can help you bypass rudimentary censorship systems based solely on DNS, but it cannot truly hide what you are visiting from your ISP.

On the flip side, proprietary software is less transparent, but that does not imply it is not secure. Major proprietary software projects can be audited internally and by third-party agencies, and independent security researchers can still find vulnerabilities with techniques like reverse engineering.

At the end of the day, it is **vital** that you research and evaluate the privacy and security properties of each piece of software being used, and avoid making decisions based on biases.

:material-numeric-2-circle: **Shifting trust can increase privacy**

We talk about "shifting trust" a lot when discussing solutions like VPNs, which shift the trust you place in your ISP to the VPN provider. While this protects your browsing data from your ISP specifically, the VPN provider you choose still has access to your browsing data: Your data is not yet completely secured from all parties. This means that:

1. You need to exercise caution when choosing a provider to shift trust to, rather than choosing blindly.
2. You still need to employ other techniques like end-to-end encryption to protect your data completely, merely distrusting one provider to trust another is not hiding your data.

> :material-numeric-3-circle: **Privacy-focused service providers are inherently trustworthy**

Reviewer: I think this should be reworded to focus more on privacy-focused **solutions**, not specifically providers. There's things like Ungoogled Chromium where it is advertised for privacy but still shouldn't be used due to a number of other concerns.

Governments often cite mass surveillance programs as necessary to combat terrorism and prevent crime, however it is most often used to disproportionately target minorities, political dissidents, and many other groups to create a chilling effect on free speech.

> > In the face of Edward Snowden's disclosures of government programs such as [PRISM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PRISM) and [Upstream](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Upstream_collection), intelligence officials also admitted that the NSA had for years been secretly collecting records about virtually every American’s phone calls — who’s calling whom, when those calls are made, and how long they last. This kind of information, when amassed by the NSA day after day, can reveal incredibly sensitive details about people’s lives and associations, such as whether they have called a pastor, an abortion provider, an addiction counselor, or a suicide hotline.[^1]

Author: This is not a typo

Reviewer 2: Oh well it literally just shows brackets in the site preview, looks pretty weird.
